## Discussion

XR-seq methodology has become prominent in genome-wide profiling of nucleotide excision repair at single-nucleotide resolution. 
This technique has been applied to a variety of model organisms, from humans to bacteria. 
Although genome-level understanding of human repair behavior is relatively well established in recent years, the associations between closely related primates with respect to UV damage response and genome-wide repair distribution were entirely lacking. 
With this pilot study, we established the differences and similarities between mouse lemur and human using a pair of similarly derived fibroblast cell lines.
First, we observed repair efficiency differences between the two genomes of the two major types of DNA damage induced by UV. 
Like in humans, (6-4)PP was much more quickly completed compared to CPD in mouse lemur. 
Both (6-4)PP and CPD repair efficiencies were slower in mouse lemur fibroblasts relative to human fibroblasts. 
This observation is in agreement with the survival assays, which show that mouse lemur cell lines were more sensitive to UV, which contains both damage types we studied. 
Although this comparison is limited to only two species, and further analysis would be required to make a more definitive conclusion, we postulate that the differences could result from differing repair enzyme activity between the species because of differences in fur which protects from UV exposure or due to the differences in diurnal and nocturnal lifestyles of the two species.

Interestingly, we also observed that TCR was relatively more efficient in mouse lemurs compared to humans, particularly for CPD repair. 
TCR of (6-4)PP was not prominent, as was previously shown, and our immunoslot blot assays indicate that (6-4)PP repair is fast and therefore, repaired mostly by GR rather than TCR. 
We observed similar TS and NTS repair signal for (6-4)PP in genic regions, also suggesting that GR is the primary subpathway to repair (6-4)PP.
A striking fact is an inverse correlation between TCR, which is measured by the TS/NTS repair signal, and overall repair efficiencies.
Mouse lemurs with more efficient TCR fall behind in total repair compared to the human. 
A possible explanation for this observation is that global repair is the primary determinant of the repair efficiency. 
XR-seq yields the entire nucleotide excision repair events with no distinction between TCR and GR. 
For this reason, GR and TCR efficiencies derived through XR-seq are relative to each other.
Like the relativity in any RNA-seq, which cannot measure the total transcription levels, XR-seq also gives the relative distribution of the repair events. 
Therefore, measured "TCR efficiency" actually corresponds to "GR deficiency" in the XR-seq profile.
In other words, when the damage is not efficiently recognized by the GR pathway, TCR takes over the recognition and removes DNA lesions in TS.
With this study, previously observed high TCR levels in *Arabidopsis thaliana* [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03922-5] and mouse [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1804493115] now also suggest relatively poor GR efficiency in those organisms.

Human evolution has been under investigation since the time of Charles Darwin. 
Comparative analyses between humans and other animals have revealed both shared and human-specific features. 
In the era of molecular biology, it has been possible to identify molecular features as they are shared between humans and their relatives. 
Primates are an extremely diverse group comprised of species that range in body size from 30-80 grams (mouse lemurs) to 150kg (African apes). 
Mouse lemurs stand out as the world's smallest living primate. 
Given detailed knowledge of primate phylogeny and divergence times [@doi:10.1093/sysbio/syy001], we know that the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of humans and mouse lemurs is MRCA of all living primate species and that this MRCA likely arose near the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary 65 mya. 
Thus, we can reasonably conclude that features that are shared between humans and mouse lemurs are homologous and characteristic of the primate clade.

We have a limited knowledge of the epigenetic architecture of mouse lemurs as we far lack chromatin data. 
Prior to this study, it was unknown whether repair profiles would be similar in the comparison of two primates species. 
Our work revealed that human and mouse lemur fibroblasts are significantly similar with respect to their preference on which genomic region to repair first. 
This bias is likely to be caused by the chromatin structure, as previously shown in other organisms [@doi:10.1038/s41467-019-08290-2].
Damage distribution is known to be homogenous at large genomic scales [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1706522114]. 
Therefore, it is safe to assume that repair preference is the major factor for XR-seq heterogeneity.
The repair profiles of human and mouse lemur fibroblasts are much more similar to each other than the ones between two distinct human cell lines. 
Moreover, (6-4)PP and CPD repair profiles are more similar to themselves, suggesting similar repair dynamics between two organisms.
Further studies on mouse lemur epigenetics will possibly explain the most differentiated genomic repair levels in mouse lemurs. 
Better understanding mouse lemur genomics, as well as other species within the strepsirrhine clade, will provide additional insight into human evolution, repair and mutagenesis.




