## Declarations


### Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

### Consent for publication

Not applicable.

### Availability of data and material

All raw and processed sequencing data generated in this study have been submitted to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession number GSE145883. 
The code repository for the data analyses can be accessed at https://github.com/CompGenomeLab/lemurRepair.

### Competing interests

The authors declare that there is no competing interests regarding the publication of this article.

### Funding

The design of the repair assays is supported by the National Institutes of Health [GM118102, ES027255 to A.S.]. 
Cell line establishment was supported by the National Science Foundation [DEB-1354610 to A.Y.D].
Conceptualization and computational analysis were supported by European Molecular Biology Organization Installation Grant (to O.A.)

### Authors' contributions

OA, AS, LL-B and ADY conceived of the project and designed the experiments. Mouse lemur tissue was acquired by ADY and PAL, cell lines were prepared by AB providing reagents for immortalization (hTERT construct). LL-B performed experimental assays, XR-seq and RNA-seq experiments. VOK, UA and ZK performed computational analyses. OA interpreted the data and wrote the first draft. All authors have read, revised and approved the final manuscript.

### Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr. Beth A Sullivan for the construct to make the TERT-immortalized lines.
A.Y.D is supported by the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
O.A. is supported by TUBITAK 2232 International Fellowship for Outstanding Researchers Program and Young Scientist Grant (BAGEP) awarded by Science Academy, Turkey. 


