## Figure legends

![ Characteristics of excised oligomers upon repair of UV-induced damages. 
*(A)* In vivo excision assay for (6-4)PP and CPD are shown. 
*(B)* XR-seq read length distribution of excised oligomers for CPD (top) and (6-4)PP (bottom). Human and mouse lemur are shown in blue and red, respectively. 
*(C)* Nucleotide frequency in the predominant oligomer (26nt) for each primate and damage type. Representative data from replicate 1.
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig1 .white} 

![ UV sensitivity and repair rates in human and lemur fibroblasts. 
*(A)* Clonogenic survival assay (left) and the quantified results (right).
*(B)* Immunoslot blot repair assays to examine the repair kinetics of UV-induced DNA lesions for both organisms and each damage type (left).
Remaining damage levels at each time point were quantified and plotted (right).
All experiments were repeated three times, and graphed data are presented as (mean+/-SD). 
Tests (t-test) performed (H~0~:μ~human~=μ~lemur~) for each dosage (A) and time points (B).
\* P ≤ 0.05; ** P ≤ 0.01; *** P ≤ 0.001; rest P > 0.05.
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig2 .white}

![ Transcription-coupled repair in mouse lemur and human fibroblasts. 
Average profiles of CPD XR-seq (top) and (6-4)PP XR-seq (bottom) over 5277 and 3366 annotated genes are plotted for human (left) and mouse lemur (right), respectively. 
Transcription start sites (TSS) and transcription end sites (TES) were retrieved from GTF (Gene Transfer Format) files for the two genomes.
Transcribed (red) and nontranscribed (blue) strand repair are shown in the downstream and upstream of TSS and TES, respectively.
10 kb upstream and downstream of TSS and TES were divided into 100 bp windows. 
XR-seq reads aligned to each bin were normalized to RPKM (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads). 
The XR-seq RPKM values were normalized by the shuffled RPKM values derived by mapped reads aligned to random genomic sites. 
Only replicate 1 is shown. TS/NTS median values for TSS downstream for CPD are 1.76 and 2.31 for human and mouse lemur, respectively.
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig3 .white}

![ Comparative analysis methodology and correlated repair rates between human and mouse lemur. 
A) Approach to identify orthologous regions between human and mouse lemur (see methods for details). 
B) Scatter plots showing the normalized repair levels between two organisms. 
Relative repair was calculated by normalizing the repair signal by the simulated XR-seq reads to eliminate the sequence context bias. 
C) Mapped orthologous regions with repair and transcription profiles mapped at left and right outer rings, respectively. 
Inner circle represents the human (left) and mouse lemur (right) chromosomes. 
Inner lines connecting orthologous regions are colored based on the human chromosome color scale. 
Repair and transcription values (outer rings) for genomic regions that have no evident ortholog (based on the criteria in A) are not shown.
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig4 .white}

![ Repair rate consistency in correlation with gene expression. 
The transcription levels of the orthologous regions were divided into quartiles separately for human and lemur. 
Out of the quartiles, 10 bootstrapped subsamples were retrieved, and for those regions repair correlation was analyzed. 
Correlation coefficient (R values) are represented on the y-axis; quartiles are on the x-axis.
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig5 .white}

![ Cell type-based consistency of repair profiles between two primates. A) Scatter plot or normalized repair levels between two human cell lines, GM18787 and NHF1, show correlation (R=0.65, p=0). B) Principle component analysis of 10 XR-seq samples. 
](images/fig-0.png){#fig:fig6 .white}